TAP13 draft (#118)
theupdateframework/taps: tap13.md

repository.

# Rationale

We introduce this TAP because the alternative is slightly onerous.  One could
technically achieve the first and second use cases (different curated lists of
packages and additional protection against a compromise of the repository’s
root key) by using delegations to multiple repositories.  The way in which this 
would work would be to have the security team at Alice's company run their 
own repository and for Alice to use a mapping [TAP 4](tap4.md) that indicates 
that both the security team and the original repository must be trusted for an 
installation to happen.  In this way, only software blessed by the security team 
may be installed.

However, this does not support the final use case above of transparently 
referring to an in-house version.  The reason is that
the original repository must also indicate that software is trustworthy, which it
would not in this case.  This TAP allows the user to override (i.e., ignore) the 
top-level targets metadata.  The repository's separate namespace will not
match with Alice's in this case.

# Specification

In order to support this situation, we propose a change to the mapping 

> metadata to enable the name and key(s) for a targets metadata file to be specified.

Author: Agreed.  I'm a bit at a loss about how to do this since the mapping metadata isn't precisely defined in format.  

Does anyone have thoughts on this?

> metadata to enable the name and key(s) for a targets metadata file to be specified.

Reviewer: We do have a definition in [TAP 4](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blame/cc692d47a80315fd210d75d4430fedcb13cb98ce/tap4.md#L208-L266):
```javascript
{
  // For each repository, its key name is the directory where files, including
  // the root metadata file, are cached, and its value is a list of URLs where
  // files may be downloaded.
  "repositories": {
    "Django": ["https://djangoproject.com/"],
    "PyPI":   ["https://pypi.python.org/"]
  },
  // For each set of targets, specify a list of repositories where files may be
  // downloaded.
  "mapping": [
    {
      // Much like target delegation, the order of these entries indicates
      // the priority of the delegation.  The entries listed first will be
      // considered first.
      // Map the targets "/django/django-1.*.tgz" to both Django and PyPI.
      "paths":        ["/django/django-1.*.tgz"],
      "repositories": ["Django", "PyPI"],
      // At least one repository must sign for the same length and hashes
      // of the "/django/django-1.*.tgz" targets.
      "threshold": 1
      // In this case, the "terminating" attribute is set to false.
      "terminating":  false,
      // Therefore, if this mapping has not signed for "/django/django-1.*.tgz"
      // targets, the following mapping will be consulted.
    },
    {
      ...
    {
      // Map all other targets only to PyPI.
      "paths":        ["*"],
      "repositories": ["PyPI"],
      "terminating": true
      "threshold": 1
    }
  ]
}
``` 

I'll need to think about how to best integrate TAP 13 with the concepts of TAP 4.

> metadata to enable the name and key(s) for a targets metadata file to be specified.

Reviewer 2: It took me a bit to think through, but I don't think we expect the selection of top-level targets to be mutually exclusive of other mappings? For example, I could have a mapping file which both maps the targets role to my filtered view of targets file(s) _and_ maps paths (that must exist within this filtered view) to repositories with optional threshold and terminating flags.

With that in mind I started to wonder about extending the existing "mapping" list to include a list of targets. A threshold flag seems to me to make sense for a targets mapping, such that a minimum number of repositories sign for the same targets metadata file(s). I think a terminating flag might also makes sense, such that a user could prevent the targets metadata file(s) being trusted from some of the mapped repositories?

However, I haven't been able to fully reason out how we would express the nuances above in the specification and workflows.

Therefore, I am wondering if it would it make more sense to have the targets mapping be a separate ordered list of targets files to include in the customised namespace? Making our mapping file something like:

```
{
  // For each repository, its key name is the directory where files, including
  // the root metadata file, are cached, and its value is a list of URLs where
  // files may be downloaded.
  "repositories": {
    "Django": ["https://djangoproject.com/"],
    "PyPI":   ["https://pypi.python.org/"]
  },
  // The names and keys of targets metadata files on the repository that
  // will be composed together into a filtered view of the repository for
  // this client.
  // TODO: must the targets metadata files exist on all repositories?
  "targets": {
      "tuf.json": {"keyids": [...]},
      "securesystemslib.json": {"keyids": [...]}
  },
  // For each set of targets, specify a list of repositories where files may be
  // downloaded.
  "mapping": [
    {
      // Much like target delegation, the order of these entries indicates
      // the priority of the delegation.  The entries listed first will be
      // considered first.
      // Map the targets "/django/django-1.*.tgz" to both Django and PyPI.
      "paths":        ["/django/django-1.*.tgz"],
      "repositories": ["Django", "PyPI"],
      // At least one repository must sign for the same length and hashes
      // of the "/django/django-1.*.tgz" targets.
      "threshold": 1
      // In this case, the "terminating" attribute is set to false.
      "terminating":  false,
      // Therefore, if this mapping has not signed for "/django/django-1.*.tgz"
      // targets, the following mapping will be consulted.
    },
    {
      ...
    {
      // Map all other targets only to PyPI.
      "paths":        ["*"],
      "repositories": ["PyPI"],
      "terminating": true
      "threshold": 1
    }
  ]
}
```

In the example above, would the targets need to exist on all repositories?

> metadata to enable the name and key(s) for a targets metadata file to be specified.

Reviewer 3: From my understanding, in that example the top-level targets file would need to exist on all repositories. If we want it to differ between repositories, maybe we can allow the user to include one for each mirror.

On another note, how would targets mapping metadata work for a client that does not support multiple repositories? One advantage to putting the targets mapping information in a separate file from the repository mapping information is that a client can choose to use one or the other of these without additional overhead.

(optionally) write consistent snapshots is not changed by this TAP.  Consistent
snapshots already require versioned metadata to be available for all targets metadata 
files.  All targets metadata files (top-level and otherwise) are also stored in the 
same METAPATH location listed in snapshot.json.

The changes in the client application workflow are fairly minor from this
TAP.  Steps 4.0 and 4.4.0 should refer to the specified target's metadata file instead 
of the top-level targets metadata file.  Additionally, instead of verifying the targets metadata
file using the key in the root metadata in step 4.0, verification must use the 
keys listed in the mapping metadata.

There likely also needs to be a clarity pass throughout to make this potential
use mode clearer in the specification.

From an operational standpoint, a lost targets key for a delegated target could have been 
remedied before by the repository but this no longer works.  If the repository delegated to 
a target from the top-level targets role, that file could be updated if Alice’s key changed or 
was lost.  However, as the repository’s root role is no longer trusted, any clients using this

> TAP must take more care if it is operationally difficult to touch clients in the case of key
> loss, perhaps first using a targets role with a threshold of offline keys before delegating to 

Author: ```suggestion
TAP must take more care because the root metadata may not be used to revoke trust in 
the targets key.  Thus, a user should take into account the operational difficultly to touch 
clients in the case of key loss for the top level targets file.  If it is operationally difficult to
touch the clients, then the client may perhaps use a threshold of offline keys before delegating to 
```

> loss, perhaps first using a targets role with a threshold of offline keys before delegating to 

Author: Made an edit below.  Please check

a developer’s key.  TAP 8 also provides support for cases where the key need to be rotated
or changed and the key is still accessible to the developer.

# Security Analysis

Our overall belief is that this is a security positive change to TUF.
The added complexity from this change is fairly small.  The mapping metadata 
itself already exists in TUF and this TAP merely makes a small addition to 
parameterize the top-level targets role.  We feel that implementation errors 
with adding this TAP are unlikely to occur.  However, the ability to better 
control trust should help users to better secure important operational use 
cases.  We are also unaware of plausible scenarios where this feature would
lead to insecurity due to abuse or misconfiguration.  Hence our belief is that 

> this TAP will be a security positive change.

Reviewer: I also think we should mention in this section that with this TAP we lose the ability to in-band recover from a top-level targets key compromise. Since top-level targets is cut off from root, we can't use any of the root role key rotation powers.

> lead to insecurity due to abuse or misconfiguration.  Hence our belief is that 
> this TAP will be a security positive change.

Author: ```suggestion
lead to insecurity due to abuse or misconfiguration except the inability to
have the root role rotate the targets key.  However, selectively removing this
capability from the root role is the purpose of this TAP.
```

> this TAP will be a security positive change.

Author: Okay, please check the next text to see if this helps.

and retrieval are not changed by this TAP.  The description about how to 
(optionally) write consistent snapshots is not changed by this TAP.  Consistent
snapshots already require versioned metadata to be available for all targets metadata 
files.  All targets metadata files (top-level and otherwise) are also stored in the 
same METAPATH location listed in snapshot.json.

The changes in the client application workflow are fairly minor from this
TAP.  Steps 4.0 and 4.4.0 should refer to the specified target's metadata file instead 
of the top-level targets metadata file.  Additionally, instead of verifying the targets metadata
file using the key in the root metadata in step 4.0, verification must use the 
keys listed in the mapping metadata.

There likely also needs to be a clarity pass throughout to make this potential
use mode clearer in the specification.

From an operational standpoint, a lost targets key for a delegated target could have been 
remedied before by the repository but this no longer works.  If the repository delegated to 
a target from the top-level targets role, that file could be updated if Alice’s key changed or 

> was lost.  However, as the repository’s root role is no longer trusted, any clients using this

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, root is still trusted for other top-level keys. Maybe we can refine like so...
```suggestion
was lost.  However, as the repository’s root role is no longer trusted to provide top-level targets keys, any clients using this
```

TAP must take more care because the root metadata may not be used to revoke trust in 
the targets key.  Thus, a user should take into account the operational difficultly to touch 
clients in the case of key loss for the top level targets file.  If it is operationally difficult to
touch the clients, then the client may perhaps use a threshold of offline keys before delegating to 

> a developer’s key.  TAP 8 also provides support for cases where the key need to be rotated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a developer’s key.  [TAP 8](tap8.md) also provides support for cases where the key need to be rotated
```

> a developer’s key.  TAP 8 also provides support for cases where the key need to be rotated

Reviewer: By developer's key, do you mean top-level targets key? It might be confusing to the reader to talk about a developer key that wasn't mentioned before here.

Reviewer: Also, I find it interesting to say that the client delegates to the developer (top-level targets?). If we frame it that way we could say that the mapping file and thus the client becomes the root of trust. Is that correct?

> a developer’s key.  TAP 8 also provides support for cases where the key need to be rotated

Author: ```suggestion
what would have been the top-level targets role.  TAP 8 also provides support for cases where the key need to be rotated
```

in the repository by maintaining control of key distribution.

For users of some public repositories, the repository is considered an untrusted
distribution mechanism, and should not be trusted with this key distribution.
For these repositories, the owner of a delegated targets role needs a mechanism
to ensure that their users can define and pin keys.

To allow for these untrusted repositories, we propose adding namespaces to TUF
repositories. That is, if Alice and Bob both use repository X and ask
for package foo, they may get different results based on their trusted namespaces.
This proposal enables clients to restrict the targets they consume to
filtered views of the repository.  

These different views could be defined by either different users on the
repository, made available by the repository administrator, or be created by
some other third party.  One likely use is to have a repository where the signing
authority for namespaced collections of targets are delegated to more granular
roles, such as in the proposed [PyPI Maximum Security Model](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0480/) where developers

> sign for the targets produced by their projects. A client can curate a list of

Reviewer 4: Is PyPI the prime example of where this could be used?

I'm asking because I've been trying very hard to imagine how that would work and I've failed to identify a scenario where this would be useful. Is is possible to get a practical example (doesn't have to be in this draft) of the sort of mapping that would be useful in the PyPI case.

Reviewer 3: In the PEP 480 model, a user could limit PyPI downloads to those that are delegated from the claimed role, and so only install end-to-end signed images.

There were also some requests for this feature with regards to container registries, so that an organization could curate a list of verified packages and keys for their customers.

Reviewer 4: Would it be possible to write a specific example out in more detail? The core issue I have in understanding this is that people don't install stand-alone "images" from PyPI. They install a whole tree of dependencies. That tree is extremely unlikely to consist of packages signed by one or even a few roles (assuming I've understood the ideas correctly).

So installing a package that depends on a dozen other packages (that in turn depend on dozens of other packages) is the norm, not the exception... and I don't think it's reasonable to assume that these packages come from only a few delegated roles. So how does the Mapping that is useful for this use case get generated in practice?  Does it contain dozens of roles? 

Maybe I've just misunderstood the idea -- but again, a specific example in the style of _"company X has done due diligence on the Django developers and wants to trust them, but not pypi in general. The write a Mapping that..."_ could maybe help with that.

> There were also some requests for this feature with regards to container registries, so that an organization could curate a list of verified packages and keys for their customers.

Now this seems like a much easier example to understand.

Reviewer 3: Does the new text here help?

Reviewer 4: Right I see: the user does not curate who they trust, other than _trust all developers who sign their packages and do not trust any developers who don't sign_ -- this seems understandable and realistic.

enables different namespaces to exist on a repository and also provides
additional resilience to attack in the case that the root keys on the
repository are compromised.

# Motivation

Currently if a user trusts a TUF repository, a compromise of the targets role
for that repository enables an attacker to install arbitrary malicious software.
The targets role on the repository is responsible for delegating to the correct
key for each delegated targets, and so may also arbitrarily replace these keys.
A third party that controls
a delegated targets role gives their keys to the delegating role on the
repository, then has to trust that the repository will correctly list the
trusted keys for their role. In some cases, the user may wish to reduce trust
in the repository by maintaining control of key distribution.

For users of some public repositories, the repository is considered an untrusted
distribution mechanism, and should not be trusted with this key distribution.
For these repositories, the owner of a delegated targets role needs a mechanism
to ensure that their users can define and pin keys.

> To allow for these untrusted repositories, we propose adding namespaces to TUF
> repositories. That is, if Alice and Bob both use repository X and ask
> for package foo, they may get different results based on their trusted namespaces.
> This proposal enables clients to restrict the targets they consume to
> filtered views of the repository.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To allow for safer use of these untrusted repositories, we propose adding
namespaces to TUF repositories which enable explicit trust decisions. In This
mode, if Alice and Bob both use repository X and ask for package foo, they may
get different results based on their trusted namespaces.
In summary; this proposal enables clients to restrict the targets they consume
to filtered views of the repository.  
```

Edited first sentence and re-wrapped.
First sentence now reads (additions are emphasised):
> To allow for **safer use of** these untrusted repositories, we propose adding
namespaces to TUF repositories **which enable explicit trust decisions**.

These different views could be defined by either different users on the
repository, made available by the repository administrator, or be created by
some other third party. Some likely uses include:

> * Limiting packages on a repository to those that have been signed by their
> developer. For example, in the proposed [PyPI Maximum Security Model](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0480/),
> packages that are only signed by the repository are listed under the 'unclaimed'
> targets role, while packages that are signed by developers are delegated
> from the 'claimed' targets role. A user may wish to restrict packages to those
> that have been end-to-end signed, and so only use packages delegated from
> 'claimed'.
> * Curating a list of verified packages. A company may curate a subset of
> packages available on a container registry that have been validated for use
> by their customers. This curated list may include packages that the company
> signs, as well as trusted third-party dependencies. They may then
> distribute this curated list to users, who want to ensure that only
> validated packages are installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Limiting packages on a repository to those that have been signed by their
developer.** For example, in the proposed 
[PyPI Maximum Security Model](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0480/),
packages that are only signed by the repository are listed under the 'unclaimed'
targets role, while packages that are signed by developers are delegated
from the 'claimed' targets role. A user may wish to restrict packages to those
that have been end-to-end signed, and so only use packages delegated from
'claimed'.
* **Curating a list of verified packages.** A company may curate a subset of
packages available on a container registry that have been validated for use
by their customers. This curated list may include packages that the company
signs, as well as trusted third-party dependencies. They may then
distribute this curated list to users, who want to ensure that only
validated packages are installed.
```
Nit: I bolded the first sentence summarising the use-case, to make it a bit easier to scan read the TAP.

This TAP discusses a means by which different users of the same repository
may elect to use different, repository-hosted, top-level targets metadata.  This effectively
enables different namespaces to exist on a repository and also provides
additional resilience to attack in the case that the root keys on the
repository are compromised.

# Motivation

> In TUF, the root and targets roles on the repository are responsible for

Author: Perhaps start with something like, "Currently if a user trusts a TUF repository, a compromise of the targets role for that repository enables an attacker to install arbitrary malicious software."

Reviewer 3: I updated the first few paragraphs. Is it better?
